From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
95. Recorded live Monday, January 7th, 2008.
Support for Hanselman it's just
provided by. Tellerik already controls.
The most comprehensive suite of
components for windows. Forum is
an asp.net web application. online@wwwdottelerik.com.
Support is also provided by.net
developers journal. The world's leading.net
developer magazine are mine at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott and
Carl discussed the year 2007
in review for developers. Hi,
this is Carl Franklin and you're
listening to Hansel minutes from
Hanselman it's dot com. It's
good to be back talking
to you and talking to
Scott again. Hi Scott. Hello,
sir. How was your Paternity
leave? Well, I'm still on
like three hours sleep. Baby's
up every couple of hours,
so yeah, we're tired, but
you know, it's good. He's
about a seven, six and
a half, seven weeks old.
Now he's about 12 pounds
eating well, healthy baby, all
the fingers and toes. So
we're happy. What's his name?
His name's Tabo Tabo means
happiness. Awesome. Yeah, we're pretty,
we're pretty excited and Denzo
is enjoying, enjoying the little
baby. Well, get my best
Timo and, and the kids.
And let's talk about the
year interview. All right. So
yeah, this is the first
a fresh Hansel minutes, the,
the new year here. And
I was thinking we basically
just talk a little bit
about 2007 and you know,
what it saw and then
what we're going to see
change in 2008, going to
make some bold predictions. I
don't know if I'm going
any bull. Every time I
come up with a bold
prediction and ends up being
completely wrong. So, gosh, I
don't know. I mean Silverlight
to, Oh, we'll ship. I
think that's a pretty, not
a bold prediction considering that
it's the 1st of January, right? Yep.
Gosh, that's a good question.
You caught me off guard.
All right, we'll get to
that. Now let's talk about
changes for the developer. What
what's changed, what changed this
year for the developer? Well,
I think that it's fair
to say that dotnet one
X is, is seen its
day and that we all
should be moving off of.net
1.0, and at least being
on two. Oh, when I
say two, Oh, I really
mean the two Oh CLR.
Not necessarily whether you're on
2005 or 2008, but it's
really time to be inside
the dotnet two. Oh, CLR.
I would think, I think
that, you know, in the
coming months, when we see
the release of a windows
server 2008, I think that
it's definitely gonna be time
to upgrade those 2000 servers
or 2003 servers that you
might certainly, there's no excuse
to be running windows 2000
server that I can think
of. I mean, all of
my servers are 2003, right.
And for me, the really
compelling reason to upgrade to
2008, I've actually just upgraded
a couple of machines to
2008. One of the release
candidates just recently is the,
the virtualization stuff. Right. I
mean, being able to have
the built in virtualization. So
I've taken a couple of
old machines, including a couple
of wind 98  machines
and just kind of virtualized
them and stuck them on
that machine. So I don't
have to think about them
anymore. So I would say
actually I'm thinking that 2008
virtualization's to hit the mainstream,
if it hasn't already, right?
Yeah. Yeah. That's certainly good.
I don't think that's a
controversial, controversial statement. No, I
don't think so either. It's,
it's certainly some great new
stuff. Not necessarily developer oriented,
but you know, certainly developers
bump up against that stuff.
I was going to say,
I think that that, that
is developer oriented. I think
that that what serve more
and more of the developers
have to think about what
server that they're going to
be running on because there's
services that are available to
them on those servers that
they, they may not know.
They may not ordinarily have.
I mean, I still get
emails sometimes saying, you know,
why can't I get dotnet
to around when 95? Sure
enough. So you never really
know what you're going to
be up against. And of
course, if you've got a
2008 machine or a Vista
machine, and that's what you're
developing for, you've already got
those services on it, you
know, you can do, but
develop for Avalon. I mean,
WPF. Yeah. Honestly, I'm looking
for a segue to visual
studio 2008, which is really
the big story of, of
2007. Yeah. I switched over
everything to 2008. It really
is wonderful. Initially I was
concerned that, you know, I'm
going to keep a 2005
machine around just in case.
Right. Cause I didn't really
kind of believe that the
multi targeting was going to
work, but you know, every
application that I had that
was a two Oh 2005
application just upgraded very cleanly
and was able to, to,
to still build. So being
able to target to, Oh,
from 2008, definitely made it
worthwhile to upgrade and then
get all of the benefits
of, of the ID. And
then of course, code rush
three Oh, is coming out
and supports 2008. So then
that was the last reason
to, to wait. Right. And
since the two that visual
studio, 2008, based on the
2005 code base, you know,
it's got all the, all
of the stability. I've only
had it crash maybe once
or twice. And it was
an add in that caused
the crash. So I don't
feel bad at all about
recommending visual studio 2008 for,
for folks to start using
as their main machines you've
switched over, haven't you? Yeah,
absolutely. I'm loving it. The,
of course the, you know,
visual studio and.net, aren't the
only things that have changed
for developers this year. There've
been a whole suite of
languages that have people learned
about this year. A lot
of people in the dinette
space learned about this year,
especially the dynamic languages. Well,
yeah, there's all this stuff
on with the DLR. I
think that in 2008, we're
going to see a lot
of information going on about
when the, when the DLR
will be considered, you know,
finished. And I think that
since rails Ruby on rails
2.0 finished, basically just at
the end of last year
in December, that that's going
to get people more excited
about rails. And then we've
got the MVC framework for
asp.net. That'll be coming out
in the first half of
2008 balancing all this stuff.
There's a lot of interest
in, in dynamic languages, in
an alternate or alternative web
frameworks. I think there's definitely
a resurgence of MVC, separate
from asp.net MVC. You've got
rails. Of course, you get
to Django in different MVC
frameworks. I think it'll be
really interesting to see how
they, the monorail team decides
to integrate things. Are they
going to pull an asp.net
MVC in and extend it
and expand on it, add
things like the, the castle
Windsor and version of control
container and things like that.
And then to see, are
we going to see a
rails on.net this year? I
don't know, you know, will
we see ruby.net and running
rails or will we find
people writing asp.net, MVC applications
and using rails for their,
for their views perhaps. Yeah.
And you're not much of
a rails guy, right? You
haven't drank that rail. I
really haven't. And quite frankly,
I'm very happy with the
tools that I have for
what I do personally, but
I'm not probably a good
judge as an I'm not,
I'm not a normal developer,
you know? Oh yeah. That's
cool though. You know, the
thing is it is about
being happy in your own
skin and being happy with,
with what you're using. But
I think we can always
learn from these other alternative
frameworks. So when I say
alternative, I mean not whatever
we are using in this
case. Right. Seen it, you
know, I've seen Ruby on
rails and I like it.
I mean, I think it's,
I think it's really cool
for what it does and
it is great to look
at these things and learn
from them. Now, if you
played with subsonic with subsonic
yeah. A little bit. Yeah.
I think that subsonic is
really coming into its own
this year. And I think
that now that the, that
Rob is going to be
working for Microsoft, that there's
going to be a little
bit of a war, I
think in 2008, about how
are we going to generate
our data access layers? Because
I think that there's more
choice now than ever Well,
and I think there might
be more choice than people
signed up for, and that,
that may be part of
the problem. There are so
many, there are so many,
you know, ORM tools and
things that approach RM cogeneration,
middle layer generators, there's so
much now. And then there's
stuff that Microsoft has. So
I don't envy people who
are trying to make those
decisions. Cause there's so many
tools to look at. And
so many people seem to
have success with a lot
of them. So Yeah, it
might be time for us
to do a show about
that because you've got subsonic
and you've got castle active
record, which is the data
access layer that comes with
the castle project. It's a
implementation, the active record pattern
for.net. You've got things like
doodads from my generation and
you've got to all the
different or, or M things
that we're familiar with, like
in the list There's is
literally a hundred products, long,
easy, Well indefinitely. The, the
list of ones that people
would shortlist is probably at
least 10. Yeah. And that's
a lot. And if you
consider that making a decision
like that is a fairly
constraining thing, I mean, you
are really limited to what
your dad is gonna allow
you to do while we
love Also learned about the
entity framework this year. Yeah.
And that's going to be
a real point of confusion.
And I think we should
definitely focus on doing a
couple of shows on that
because I think that there's
some, some confusion in that.
And I like to hear
back from listeners on this,
that there's some confusion in
the community between the ATO
entity framework and linked to
SQL and how one is
more of a link over
the physical representation of your
database. Well, the entity framework
provides an extra layer of
abstraction to give you a
more logical views that isn't
necessarily married directly to the
database as, as tightly as
linked to SQL is. But
those, those aren't obvious things
to figure out. And I
think that we should definitely
do the best we can
to help clarify that because
you know, Microsoft is, I've
learned this in my couple
of months of working for
Microsoft is that they have
this term coopertition yeah. Where
they're working together, but they
are competing against each other.
Well, we talked about this
on dotnet rocks with Daniel Simmons
in back in April I'll
show 226. And that was
one of my first questions,
which, you know, how, where,
you know, what slots do
these technologies fit in. He
did a really good job
of sort of separating them
out. So I would encourage
people to listen to that.
Yeah. I think that anything
that we can do to
provide a little bit of
elucidation around these things, because
there's all this information that's
coming at you. And then
now the 2008 has just
come out, you're going to
see kind of the next,
the 0.5 wave I call
this. This is kind of
like, you know, a new
version of something comes out
and then all the power
packs and the ad-ons and
the things that are tweaks
and little modifications to that
new release thing will come
out. It's kind of a
sign wave that happens with
Microsoft, you know, 2005 came
out visual studio, and then
there were all these kind
of additions and the Ajax
framework, you know, Atlas and
ad-ons the web project add
on. I think we'll see
the same thing with 2008
where after 2008 comes out,
of course, we're going to
see the asp.net 3.5 extensions,
which will include MVC. They'll
include the new dynamic data
stuff. People might feel that
this is kind of an
overwhelming crush of, of stuff
coming in from Microsoft. And,
you know, can I just
stop for a month and
release nothing so that we
can just kind of soak
it in, but they're, they
are trying to move the
ball forward. Although they are,
in fact, there's so many
people at Microsoft that they're
kind of competing against each
other. I think this will
be the year that we'll
figure this stuff out. Oh
yeah, totally. Yeah. But this
will be the year that
we start to get our
brain around that. I remember
when.net first came out, that
I was just completely overwhelmed.
And I was like, Oh
my God, I'm going to
have to. And they kept
stressing how many methods there
were. I remember you'd go
and see a.net, a.net presentation.
Well, here's how reflection works.
I'll do a little thing
to find out how many
methods there are on the.net
framework. Oh, there's 280,000 good
luck. They kept stressing how
big it is. Right. Came
out. It grew by a
factor of like five or
something. Yeah. And then with
three, you know, it's like,
there's, there's definitely more than
you can handle. And this
is why I think there's,
this is the year of
the leaky abstraction. We're going
to start seeing abstraction layers
to make things simpler. You
know, MVC has a lot
sitting underneath it, but ultimately
the abstraction that you talked
to is simpler. All right.
Well, Getting off the developer
thing, now let's talk about
apps, applications that came out.
I guess this is sort
of the year of the
Ajax web application. The, you
know, it's an it's shining
glory. There have been some
apps coming out this year
that have completely blown my
mind in the sense of,
I think we asked ourselves
last year, could an application
come out where it would
be so nice in the
browser and so fast and
so clean that I wouldn't
miss. I wouldn't wish it
was a fat client. Right?
Cause there was a time
in the, or in the
beginning of 2007, when an
application would come out and
I go, well, this would
be great. It's a smart
client. Right? And then they
got better and they got
better. They got better. The,
an app that I'm completely
enamored with right now is
mint.com mint, gotta check this
out. mint.com. This is the
kind of the closest thing
to Microsoft money or Quicken
in the browser that I've
seen last year. I was
really into wasabi with sabi.com,
which is an online money
manager application, mint.com has a
little bit different perspective in
wasabi. You upload your data
from your desktop. So you
basically run an application in
the tray and you upload
your data with mint. You
have to trust them a
lot more. You actually have
to give them your bank
login information. But if you
can get past that trusting
issue, they'll automatically download your
transactions. They'll make charts and
graphs. They'll send you events
like low balances. And one
of the things that's cool
is that if they get
a complete perspective of your,
your money, they will offer
you things like, you know,
your visa is at 7%.
And if you switch over
to this visa, you can
get 4%. So they have
that kind of holistic view.
And the entire thing is
Ajax. It's clean, it's crisp.
And that's why it's free
because they, they try to
sell you financial services. Oh
yeah. Their business model is
clear. They're there. Their partners
are basically involved in the
financial services. Right. But the,
the thing that I think
is significant is that mint
is representative of people who
aren't Gmail understanding Ajax. Yeah.
So say that again. I
mean, Gmail was like the
Ajax app in the year
of Ajax and I think
mint and applications like it
are really pointing out that
other people can make really
full featured applications that they
use Egypt like Zoho. If
you've seen the Zoho suite,
no, I have to Z
O H o.com. These guys
are basically kind of nipping
at the heels of Google
docs, spreadsheets, presentations, documents, you
know, it's my Microsoft money
in the, in the browser.
Wow. People are definitely watching
Zoho, all Ajax all the
time, crazy stuff. Well, even
Gmail this year came up
with a pile of new
updates. We saw  support
for g-mail, which was huge.
Is Zoho free. Also though,
has it, they have a
free version and they have
a, a pay subscription version.
Okay. And now Gmail came
up with IMAT access, which
was massive. I stopped using
pop to talk to my
Gmail. Right. They came in
with support to talk to
'em AOL instant messenger from
Gmail talk. They've got a
contact. I finally a contact
manager it's gotten faster. And
then all the new stuff,
if you've seen it in
Google maps, local now has
this Google maps my location.
So if you take your,
yeah, if you take your,
your phone and you go
to google.com/g M M Google
mobile maps, they've got this
feature called my location where
they basically kind of a
poor man's GPS. They figure
out where you're located based
on what cell tower you're
talking to. Well, you know,
some phones have GPS built
in and their software doesn't
utilize it. So I know
windows mobile five, I believe
it was the first windows
op operating system to, to,
to, to give you the
API APIs to it. Right.
And, but I guess the,
the problem with GPS on
a phone is just the
amount of memory it takes
to have those maps in
there. Huh? Well, with Google
maps, of course they're streaming
those maps down as you,
as you move. So the
amount of memory that it
uses is very small because
it's throwing the maps out
that you can't see. Right.
And it'll allow you, if
you have a GPS in
your phone as hardware and
you don't have an application
to use it, you know,
Google maps will let you
do that. You have access
that really plug Google maps.
So work with the GPS
in your phone. Yep. Absolutely.
So if you have a
GPS or you have an
external one, you can plug
it into the port, it'll
use the GPS that's in
your phone, or you can
use the poor man's version
of my location where it'll
use your cell tower to
figure out. I didn't know
that. Yeah. We gotta to
talk more Scott. Okay. We
should, we should actually. Yeah.
All right. Let's move on
to games. Yeah. You know,
this was the year for
games. I mean, I'm not
a huge gamer. Like I'll
play a game about halfway
through and then I'll say,
wow, that was a really
satisfying experience. I get it.
And then once I realized
that I'm personally not playing
the game anymore, it's just
me versus the developer. That's
when the game kind of
like loses its luster for
me. Right. But man, 2007,
I mean, what games came
out this year that just
completely blew my mind. I
mean, call of duty four
was about the closest thing
to playing a movie that
I'd ever seen. Halo three
halo three came out. Not,
not the standout for me
this year, actually. Yeah. I
would say I would play
call of duty four over
halo three. Another game I've
been playing is called mass
effect, which is about the
closest thing to playing a
science fiction book that I've
ever seen. People. People think
it's a, a shooter. It's
not, it's absolutely an RPG.
It's a role playing game
with something like 270,000 lines
of dialogue. It's got actors
that you recognize like Seth
green, who are doing the
dialogue. You can make the
person, your main character look
like you, if you want
to by modifying their face.
And then they, Oh, it's
just amazing. There's like 150
hours of content in this
amazing game called mass effects.
A little scary. Well, and
then when are you gonna
find 150 hours? I mean,
once you have family and
the only time that I
get this, as you know,
between 1145 and 12 at
night is the only time
I get a chance, but
still games like that. Absolutely
amazing. The, you know, of
course Bioshock was unreal. I
recommend Bioshock. These are all
in one year. I mean,
you, you would hope for
a year with one good
game like this. And we
had like six. Yeah. And
actually I finally found another
game for my, we, you
know, I've got the, the
Nintendo, we, I know you
guys have got it as
well. The wife loves playing
tennis, but I felt like
for the last year I
bought this $250 tennis simulator,
you know, when's my next
game going to come out.
When's my, you know, what
else can I play? When's
a more advanced tennis game.
But then Metroid came out
and Metro I'm playing Metroid,
Metroid, Metroid, Metroid met R
O D Metroid corruption. And
it is a first person
shooter, but it doesn't use
a controller like a, like
you would inhaler your, your
character. Sam has, has this
arm with a gun on
it. And that is your,
your, we control our hand
and then you use the
nunchuck to move around. And
it's kind of the most
innovative way to move around
a first person shooter that
I've, that I've ever seen.
And it's, it really has
made the, we have very
serious. I mean, it's not
just the game for we
sports plus Mario. I mean,
it there's more to the
weed than that. And I
think that seeing, I always
thought that it was revolutionary
in that the low hanging
fruit was the sports, but
that it really opens up
the doors for game makers
to be creative with what
they can do with this
controller. And no, I don't
think it's just the $250
tennis simulators. It's just because
the games aren't out there
yet. Well, But the question
is, are they, are they
making better games? I mean,
the hardware is unreal. If
you, if you look for,
I think his name is
Johnny Chung, Lee Google for
Johnny Chung Lee. And this
is a guy who basically
he's got a website, so
Trisha, Johnny Chung, and then
the we, and he is
basically taking apart the we
and making something interesting every
week with it. And using
the we moat, that's called
the remote remote C-sharp library
from the coding for fun
guys, Johnny Chung has created
a finger tracking. He's got
an application with free source
code for a low cost
multipoint interactive whiteboard using the,
we, he's got a really
amazing video. You've got to
see about head tracking. So
you're basically making it desktop
three-dimensional virtual reality display by
putting a pair of glasses
on your head. Wow. That
has a little IRR emitter
that pretends to be the
IRR bar and then talk
to the remote. He's got
the library, he's got the
program in C-sharp And I
like the finger tracking thing.
So he's got like a
says using an led array
and some reflective tape. You
can use the infrared camera
in the we remote to
track objects, like your fingers
into D space. This lets
you interact with your computer
simply by waving your hands
in the air, similar to
the interaction scene in the
movie minority report. Yeah. And
these are things you can
do yourself. You can play
with this. The thing that
people don't realize about the,
we, it is all written
in C sharp. I think
people don't realize about the,
we is that it's the
hardware built into the we
mode that has actually an
infrared camera with built in
hardware blob tracking of up
to four different points at
a hundred Hertz. So you
think about that in terms
of what can a web
cam do? Oh wow. I'm
talking about 1,024 by seven
68 IRR camera that does
this tr this blob tracking
and hardware. That's so awesome.
People need to pay attention
to this guy and start
writing some games, but I
don't know if the games
are being developed, but the
potential for the wee hardware
is just it's obscene. It's,
it's fantastic. So I'm really
excited about that. There's actually
another thing that's coming out
for the we this year
called the, we fit that
is going to be a,
a pad that you stand
on a, like a rigid
pad, not a soft pad,
like dance, dance revolution that
will be able to detect
the, the pressure on the
bottom of your feet. So
then you can do yoga
and it will tell you
interesting. It knows whether you're
balanced or not. And then
it comes with a yoga
application. So I think the
potential for exercise applications that
will now be able to
detect your feet, as well
as your, your, your hands
using the remote. Alright, so
Let's, let's look forward to
2008 and you know, I
know that you, now that
you work for the man,
you know, you have privy,
you're privy to insight information,
and we don't want you
to divulge anything that you
can't divulge, but you must
be seeing some trends happening
in technology, not for, just
for developers, but for applications
and for games and, you
know, give us, Well, these
are just personal predictions then.
So let's just talk about
some ideas. I think that
if you've seen Google gears,
of course, right, Google gears
gives you, you know, persistence
within the browser. I think
this'll be the year where
that gets figured out, where
we're going to get local
persistent storage in the browser.
It may not necessarily be
clean, like built into the
browser. But I think that
if Firefox three builds Google
gear support in a, or
if people start building a
cleaner around the isolated storage
things inside of Silverlight such
that we can use that,
that storage in lieu of
cookies. I think that's going
to take the web to
a new, a new level.
We'll see things like Gmail
have Google gears support. We've
already seen Google reader built
in support for gears. So
the idea that the offline
web may happen. So all
this time, while we've been
waiting for, for smart clients
to, to support things like
offline, I think that Ajax
is going to actually catch
up and lap them. It's
going to get done faster.
One of the great things
about the browser is that
the data isn't on the
client. So what are the
kinds of applications that you
see where there's a local
database that the browser can
access? Well, well, just like
outlook gained greatly when it
had offline support. When you
could fire up outlook on
an airplane, put a bunch
of emails in your outbox
and then sync. When you
got back down, there are
applications that will, that will
provide value if they have
that ability. So whether you've
got calendaring or inbox things,
money management, RSS, but that
means a lot more client
side code. No, I it's
about a clean abstraction layer.
If you look at the
stuff that Google gears does,
and you think about this
as a kind of a,
of a right through cash,
you will be able to
make data access layers in
JavaScript. That will basically say,
give me this thing. I
don't care whether it's coming
from the internet or whether
it's coming from local storage,
it'll keep track of freshness.
Well, and that plays well
with silver light to Oh,
as well, doesn't it? Because
a silver light to O
app. Yes. It's delivered with
the browser, but it's really
rich. It's got rich client
support. Yeah. And that's one
of the things I think
that silver light or flash
will offer that a pure
Ajax application doesn't is that
with, with those applications, the
code is down. It's pretty
much handled with Ajax. If
you look at how to
write Ajax code against Google
gears, now your Ajax application,
if it's going to work
offline has to really think
about what part of me
is in memory. Yeah. What's
cached. What's not going to
be careful to go and,
you know, call for things
that aren't available yet. Whether
those things be images or
other resources. So it's going
to be an interesting thing,
but this is definitely, I
think the year of the
offline web. Very good. What
we'll see if any of
those predictions come true. And
I, you know, I, I
I'm with you. I think,
I think you're absolutely right
about those trends. I hope
so. We'll say if I'm
not, then we'll make up
something else next year at
the 2008 wrap-up all right,
Scott. Thanks very much. And
we'll see you next time
on Hansel minutes.